On the road of hiding… PEB, PE format handling and DLL loading homemade APIs - part 1
=====================================================================================

26-02-2012
----------

For some reasons, I decided to start my road into the malware/reversing world by rewriting the four holy APIs used in importing functions from DLLs, i.e. GetModuleHandle, GetProcAddress, the mighty LoadLibrary and FreeLibrary. If any of you don't know/remember what and how useful they are, here's a quick refresh:

* **LoadLibrary**: loads a new DLL/EXE module and returns the address it has been loaded
* **GetModuleHandle**: retrieves the address where a DLL or an EXE file has already been loaded
* **GetProcAddress**: returns the address of an exported function/variable from an already loaded DLL
* **FreeLibrary**: the opposite of LoadLibrary, i.e. frees a loaded library from the memory

Knowing this and that every time an application calls a static linked function imported from DLL, it is listed into the imported function table of the application itself, it is quite clear how useful re-implementing them is for a malware application. Having suspicious function imported (see CreateRemoteThread and other ones) can be an alarm for an anti-malware solution or for any other application monitoring the system; another point would be hiding the load DLL from the publicly visible list of the imported modules for the application.

My search started from the most "simple"-to-be-rewritten of the three functions: GetModuleHandle. After studying the problem, I discovered that there is an interesting structure managed by the operating system and associated to each process called Process Environment Block, shortened as PEB. It's not the first time I met this structure, but I don't think I ever analysed it. On [MSDN](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/winternl/ns-winternl-peb) it is poorly documented and it is stated that "this structure may be altered in future versions of Windows". Anyway, the structure is defined as follows for 32-bit systems:

    typedef struct _PEB
    {
        BYTE Reserved1[2];
        BYTE BeingDebugged;
        BYTE Reserved2[1];
        PVOID Reserved3[2];
        PPEB_LDR_DATA Ldr;
        PRTL_USER_PROCESS_PARAMETERS ProcessParameters;
        BYTE Reserved4[104];
        PVOID Reserved5[52];
        PPS_POST_PROCESS_INIT_ROUTINE PostProcessInitRoutine;
        BYTE Reserved6[128];
        PVOID Reserved7[1];
        ULONG SessionId;
    } PEB, *PPEB;

On 64-bit systems it is defined as:

    typedef struct _PEB {
        BYTE Reserved1[2];
        BYTE BeingDebugged;
        BYTE Reserved2[21];
        PPEB_LDR_DATA LoaderData;
        PRTL_USER_PROCESS_PARAMETERS ProcessParameters;
        BYTE Reserved3[520];
        PPS_POST_PROCESS_INIT_ROUTINE PostProcessInitRoutine;
        BYTE Reserved4[136];
        ULONG SessionId;
    } PEB;

Many fields (the most of them) are declared as reserved, as they are "for internal use by the operating system". About the remaining one we have a pretty good documentation (official and/or reversed). It is possible to have a complete documentation of it at [NTinternals](http://undocumented.ntinternals.net/index.html?page=UserMode%2FUndocumented%20Functions%2FNT%20Objects%2FProcess%2FPEB.html):

* **BeingDebugged**: a flag set to true when the related process is being debugged
* **Ldr**: the interesing one for me, it is a pointer to a *PPEB\_LDR\_DATA* structure containing information about the modules loaded in a process
* **ProcessParameters**: it contains information about the command line and the path of the executable which the process is related to. It is a pointer to a *PRTL\_USER\_PROCESS\_PARAMETERS* structure and the main fields in this structure are the unicode strings *ImagePathName* containing the path of the image file and *CommandLine* containing all the parameters passed to the process
* **PostProcessInitRoutine**: a soon-to-be deprecated field kept only for compatibility with Windows 2000, as it was used to initialize the application compatibility layer. The callback is called between the DLL initialization routines and the executable control transfer; using this callback function should be definitely avoided because it can cause problems
* **SessionId**: the Terminal Services session identifier associated.

As already said, *Ldr* is the interesting field. *PPEB\_LDR\_DATA* is defined as follows:

    typedef struct _PEB_LDR_DATA
    {
        BYTE Reserved1[8];
        PVOID Reserved2[3];
        LIST_ENTRY InMemoryOrderModuleList;
    } PEB_LDR_DATA, *PPEB_LDR_DATA;

The only field documented in MSDN is the last one, *InMemoryOrderModuleList*, a double-linked list containing all the modules loaded into a process. The *LIST_ENTRY* structure is defined in the following way:

    typedef struct _LIST_ENTRY
    {
        struct _LIST_ENTRY *Flink;
        struct _LIST_ENTRY *Blink;
    } LIST_ENTRY, *PLIST_ENTRY, *RESTRICTED_POINTER PRLIST_ENTRY;

When I first saw this structure, I told to myself *"OK, OK, there must be an error. Where are the interesting fields? Just two pointers to the next and the previous element of the list, which is anyway not carrying any kind of information?"*. This structure is "just" part of a bigger structure called *LDR\_MODULE*: using the pointers and knowing how the structure layout (thanks again [NTinternals](http://undocumented.ntinternals.net/UserMode/Structures/LDR_MODULE.html)), it is possible to browse through the whole thing.

    typedef struct _LDR_MODULE
    {
        LIST_ENTRY InLoadOrderModuleList;
        LIST_ENTRY InMemoryOrderModuleList;
        LIST_ENTRY InInitializationOrderModuleList;
        PVOID BaseAddress;
        PVOID EntryPoint;
        ULONG SizeOfImage;
        UNICODE_STRING FullDllName;
        UNICODE_STRING BaseDllName;
        ULONG Flags;
        SHORT LoadCount;
        SHORT TlsIndex;
        LIST_ENTRY HashTableEntry;
        ULONG TimeDateStamp;
    } LDR_MODULE, *PLDR_MODULE;

So I had a pointer to the second field of this structure: having a pointer to the LDR\_MODULE structure would just require subtracting the size of two LIST\_ENTRYs. There's a big thing to keep in mind about the LIST\_ENTRY organization: as it can be easily seen, it's en antry of a circular double linked list and the head of the list can be accessed by storing the *Flink* pointer of *InMemoryOrderModuleList*. Once had this pointer, it's possible to loop (and obtain each time the LDR\_MODULE structure) until the head of the list is reached again.

This structure is a briefcase full of information:

* **BaseAddress**: the HMODULE value that should retrieved with the GetModuleHandle
* **EntryPoint**: the name says it all
* **SizeOfImage**: the size of memory allocated to store all the section, rounded to the next 4Kb multiple
* **FullDllName** / **BaseDllName**: the full path / name-of-the-file of the loaded module

Problem: how do I retrieve the PEB structure? Pretty simple, there are two ways to do this:

* Using the exported function from ntdll.dll called *NtQueryInformationProcess*, which has to be imported at runtime because it is not exported. This method can be easily monitored by the operating system, so it is usually avoided
* Using a little bit of assembly code

The NtQueryInformationProcess function has the following prototype (from [MSDN](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-gb/windows/win32/api/winternl/nf-winternl-ntqueryinformationprocess?redirectedfrom=MSDN)):

    NTSTATUS WINAPI NtQueryInformationProcess(
      __in       HANDLE ProcessHandle,
      __in       PROCESSINFOCLASS ProcessInformationClass,
      __out      PVOID ProcessInformation,
      __in       ULONG ProcessInformationLength,
      __out_opt  PULONG ReturnLength
    );

Before calling this function it is required to open the process with a call to the *OpenProcess* function, asking for read rights. By passing the *ProcessBasicInformation* enum value as an argument for the *ProcessInformationClass* parameter, the PEB address can be retrieved by looking at the PROCESS\_BASIC\_INFORMATION structure returned by the function (it has a field called *PebBaseAddress*). Reading the PEB can be easily done with a call to the *ReadProcessMemory* API.

The other method relies on the Thread Information Block, a pretty complicated mostly-undocumented structure (maybe I'll post something about it). The PEB is stored at FS:[0x30]. Getting this is possible using assembly:

    __asm
    {
        mov ebx, fs:[0x30]
        mov peb, ebx
    }

or, for x64 systems:

    __asm
    {
        mov rbx, gs:[0x60]
        mov peb, rbx
    }

With this information, it is pretty simple to retrieve the base address of a loaded module with the following steps:

1. Obtain the PEB
2. Get the InMemoryOrderModuleList.Flink and store it as a head entry
3. Get the head of the LDR\_MODULE by subtracting a couple of LIST\_ENTRYs
4. Compare each time the *BaseDllName* field with the name of the requested module
5. If it's the same, return the BaseAddress value, if not, get the next entry by accessing to Flink and go to the step #2

What if the module isn't there? If I were just writing a custom implementation of the GetModuleHandle function, this would mean that the module hasn't already been loaded; as I am writing a custom LoadLibrary too (I really hope, as I'm getting some problems in doing that, keep the faith bro) which won't store the loaded modules there, it will have to look in an internal DB storing the modules it loads each time. This can be easily done with a map or a list.

In my implementation, the GetModuleHandle doesn't require the name of the module as an argument, but its hash instead: in this way I don't store any string (as a trivial anti-debugging measure); so, every time a comparison is perfomed, the value of BaseDllName must be hashed as well.

I have to break the post here, as I decided to split it into three (or maybe four) parts. I almost finished rewriting the LoadLibrary, but, as I am working only during the evenings on this, it could take more than expected. I get some problems with Windows 7 DLL loading and there are a lot of bugs yet-to-be-fixed. Hope you liked it and, in case I missed something, don't exitate to comment the post and I'll fix it.
