Botnets surrounding us: performing requests, sending out KADEMLIA2\_REQ and asking contact, where art thou?"
============================================================================================================

23-11-2013, 19:37
-----------------

"Are we there yet?" I'd say no. The journey to have a basic botnet running is still pretty long, but the enthusiasm is big enough to cover it all.

The next major step is understanding how the lookup process works: the concept behind it is that, even if a client doesn't know all the other peers in the Kad network, it is still be able to find any other Kad client.

Let's start with the definition of the KADEMLIA2\_REQ/S messages:

**KADEMLIA2\_REQ (opcode 0x21)**

- **unsigned int 8-bit**: Kad packet identifier
- **unsigned int 8-bit**: KADEMLIA2\_REQ opcode
- **unsigned int 8-bit**: contacts count
- **unsigned int 128-bit**: target ID
- **unsigned int 128-bit**: local contact ID

33 bytes long, this message is sent to know information about the target ID specified in the message: the maximum number of results that can be returned is specified in the message itself. The target ID can be the client ID of a peer or the hash value of _sources_, _keywords_ and _notes_. Looking for a source means looking for the MD4 hash of a file. Looking for keywords is a search based on file names: each filename is split into several keywords and published into the Kad network. The search is then performed on the MD4 of the keyword. A note is a comment in the file, and it will be also identified with the source ID.

The different targets are the following, each one associated to a different number of desired contacts in the reply:

- **FIND\_NODE** (11 contacts requested): _NODE_, _NODECOMPLETE_, _NODESPECIAL_, _NODEFWCHECKUDP_
- **FIND\_VALUE** (2 contacts requested): _FILE_, _KEYWORD_, _FINDSOURCE_, _NOTES_
- **STORE** (4 contacts required): _FINDBUDDY_, _STOREFILE_, _STOREKEYWORD_, _STORENOTES_

In short, if a contact wants to be closer to a target, it selects the 50 different closest-to-the-target contacts in its routing table and sends a request to the three closest ones with a contact type lower than 4. When one of these contacts receives the requests, a search in the routing table is performed in order to find the closest-to-the-target contacts stored with contact type lower than 3 (the quantity is the one specified in the message).

**KADEMLIA2\_RES (opcode 0x29)**

- **unsigned int 8-bit**: Kad packet identifier
- **unsigned int 8-bit**: KADEMLIA2\_RES opcode
- **unsigned int 128-bit**: target ID
- **unsigned int 8-bit**: contacts count
- **unsigned int 128-bit**: contact's contact ID
- **unsigned int 32-bit**: contact's IP address
- **unsigned int 16-bit**: contact's UDP port
- **unsigned int 16-bit**: contact's TCP port
- **unsigned int 8-bit**: contact's version
- ...

When the message is received, all the previously-unknown contacts are added to the routing table. If a FIND\_NODE search was performed, the search stops here, otherwise all the received contacts are added to the list of contactable ones and search goes on.

For botnet purposes, it's not needed to go further with the search process, as only KADEMLIA2\_REQ/S seem to be required for it. I'd say we can start the rock'n'roll (but I'll do some code cleaning before).
